MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms (#2716)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2716-batch-send-historical-messages.md

# MSC2716: Batch send historical messages

For the full problem statement, considerations, see the other `proposals/2716-importing-history-into-existing-rooms.md` document. Happy to merge the two, once we get more feedback on it.

## Alternative batch send proposal

### Expectation

Historical messages that we insert should appear in the timeline just like they would if they were sent back at that time.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

### New batch send approach

Add a new endpoint, `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event=<eventID>&chunk_id=<chunkID>`, which can insert a chunk of events historically back in time next to the given `prev_event`. This endpoint can only be used by application services. `chunk_id` comes from `next_chunk_id` in the response of the batch send endpoint and is derived from the "insertion" events added to each chunk. It's not required for the first batch send.
```
# Body

> {

Reviewer: An example body would be good here. it's not clear from first reading if these are event_ids or event bodies.

    "events": [ ... ],
    "state_events_at_start": [ ... ]
}

# Response
{
  "state_events": [...list of state event ID's we inserted],
  "events": [...list of historical event ID's we inserted],

>   "next_chunk_id": "random-unique-string",

Reviewer: I may be missing something fundamental here, but this doesn't feel quite right in my local testing:

Given a request of:
```
POST /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/!AhtfdqXEFwBLLXtWFt%3Abeefy/batch_send {
  prev_event: '$cc_sjRSqpHIwohVs_-OgWVBDGNnU7IaUE3iF1COr6PY',
  chunk_id: undefined
} {
  events: [
    {
      content: [Object],
      type: 'm.room.message',
      sender: '@historybot:beefy',
      origin_server_ts: 1628248806022
    }
  ],
  state_events_at_start: []
}
```

I received:

```
{
  state_events: [
    '$4qyngbT_X8b2szNjwMOnjLObHRR1S4za-rTQxw-kb30',
    '$mS-bVTh-yFe1O0-A4cG1Wy0Pjv0p5VJ7shDegT04QUQ',
    '$JNh0vKSat9d52uJ7IuC7ETUbwgLDyta9tEQt6isStu4',
    '$THvxDK3kPtkXVXf_X8ZJQnrk3XQ7ASvakJKekbGTce8',
    '$nfxPUPCmx3-q5NpYcLLlc7eXzbnirSVMfrgkgt84Bxc',
    '$__0vHgNt3hT60hIncIsGMIZwsAnpPx53F1OfIcfWFrs',
    '$XX_aPLCiAU6N0BOdB2Rqagil1zKZy5DH89uksSDiPfs',
    '$amQPV89fkYAuoNQIq_-Uor5yN-UVYWLN8n7-F9c7n0Q'
  ],
  events: [
    '$K2iIYUJEI5eTO1wtHSUiHLj_k54J5Zj46kmK-zsHfjE',
    '$YMQ0unPjbO_yIy0FYgyJQo2kvTZi0Bu60B3nDZ7mChU',
    '$P4ZveG-Fd0iRzfhZfylcR_k9lJYowUnjzbO1j27keaE',
    '$JpXWt0eZSV0w0V_Td05PuoUtH-yY15dJ6hi6L8kfKiY'
  ],
  next_chunk_id: 'XwNWJcKd'
}
```

which isn't a list of event that were inserted, because we've only sent one event in.

There might be something I'm missing here, but I'd like a fuller explanation of the response format.

Reviewer 2: For `state_events`, it returned all of the events used to auth the events. But this should probably change to only be `state_events_at_start`. Good shout!

For `events`, this returns 4 events in your case because it creates the "insertion" and "chunk" events for you. It also has to create a base insertion event on your first call if you don't specify any `?chunk_id` to connect it to.

```
[
  insertion event for chunk,
  your event,
  chunk event,
  base insertion event
]
```

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I wonder if this is the right approach. Specifically, we're constraining the state at the start to be a combination of the state at the insertion point plus brand new pieces of state. In particular, this means that we'll create a new member event for a given user for each chunk we create, rather than reusing a single join. Though maybe that's fine? I guess the alternative is to have `state_events_at_start` be event IDs and allow creating state separately (or allow `state_events_at_start` to be a combination of event dicts and event IDs)?

Reviewer 2: > In particular, this means that we'll create a new member event for a given user for each chunk we create, rather than reusing a single join. Though maybe that's fine

Seems fine from a downstream using perspective It's kinda nice to be able to fire and forget your join events and have it work. Otherwise, I need to add more logic and persistence to my Gitter import script to keep track of which join event ID maps to what user as I go.

 - A "marker" event is not needed for every chunk/batch of historical messages. Multiple chunks can be inserted then once we're done importing everything, we can add one "marker" event pointing at the root "insertion" event
    - If more history is decided to be added later, another "marker" can be sent to let the homeservers know again.
 - When a remote federated homeserver, receives a "marker" event, it can mark the "insertion" prev events as needing to backfill from that point again and can fetch the historical messages when the user scrolls back to that area in the future.
 - We could remove the need for "marker" events if we decided to only allow sending "insertion" events on the "live" timeline at any point where you would later want to add history.  But this isn't compatible with our dynamic insertion use cases like Gitter where the rooms already exist with no "insertion" events at the start of the room, and the examples from this MSC like NNTP (newsgroup) and email which can potentially want to branch off of everything.

The structure of the "marker" event would look like:
```js
{

>     "type": "m.room.marker",

Reviewer: It wasn't clear to me if the homeserver is meant to insert those as part of the `batch_send` API or if the appservice is meant to insert those itself?

Reviewer 2: I'll clarify that the user needs to insert them separately after they're done importing history with `batch_send`

Reviewer 2: There was a note on it but perhaps it was buried in the wall of text. I added a clarification and bolded the relevant piece talking about this 👍 

> Unlike the historical events sent via `/batch_send`, **the "marker" event is sent separately as a normal event on the "live" timeline** so that comes down incremental sync and is available to all homeservers regardless of how much scrollback history they already have.

```

</details>

### Limit who can send historical messages

Since events being silently sent in the past is hard to moderate, it will probably be good to limit who can add historical messages to the timeline. The batch send endpoint is already limited to application services but we also need to limit who can send "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" events since someone can attempt to send them via the normal `/send` API (we don't want any nasty weird knots to reconcile either)

We can limit and protect from this by introducing a new `historical` power level which controls who can send "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" events. Since we're changing the power levels and `event_auth.py` stuff in Synapse, this probably requires a new room version. For experimenting, we can use an experimental room version, `org.matrix.msc2716`.

Alternatively, we can use the existing `events` power level. For the default and existing rooms, if the "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" event PL levels are unset, we can completely disallow sending of those events in the room. This lets people opt-in and set a power level when they want an application service to start inserting history.

> 

Reviewer: Note, field names are prefixed with org.matrix.msc2716. while this is unstable (at least, that's what Synapse does). We should make a note of it here.

    end

    subgraph chunk1
        chunk1-chunk[["chunk"]] --> chunk1-2(("2")) --> chunk1-1((1)) --> chunk1-0((0)) --> chunk1-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    subgraph chunk2
        chunk2-chunk[["chunk"]] --> chunk2-2(("2")) --> chunk2-1((1)) --> chunk2-0((0)) --> chunk2-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    marker1 -.-> chunk0-insertionBase
    chunk0-insertionBase[/insertion\] -------> A
    chunk0-chunk -.-> chunk0-insertionBase
    chunk0-insertion -------> A
    chunk1-insertion --> A
    chunk1-chunk -.-> chunk0-insertion
    chunk2-insertion --> A
    chunk2-chunk -.-> chunk1-insertion
```

</details>

### Limit who can send historical messages

Since events being silently sent in the past is hard to moderate, it will probably be good to limit who can add historical messages to the timeline. The batch send endpoint is already limited to application services but we also need to limit who can send "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" events since someone can attempt to send them via the normal `/send` API (we don't want any nasty weird knots to reconcile either)

> We can limit and protect from this by introducing a new `historical` power level which controls who can send "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" events. Since we're changing the power levels and `event_auth.py` stuff in Synapse, this probably requires a new room version. For experimenting, we can use an experimental room version, `org.matrix.msc2716`.

Reviewer 2: It's unclear if a new room version is strictly necessary. @erikjohnston mentioned we might have to because any change to [`event_auth.py`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/8ae0bdca753d2f51b32bc712b66c26f331ec728c/synapse/event_auth.py) might require it.

However, I feel like this feature is backwards compatible and the homeserver can progressively enhance the room once it has the logic to see historical messages.

Homeservers who know how to interpret the "marker" event can apply the proper auth against the historical events. The originating homeserver will add the historical messages to its backfill but they could do that before.

Homeservers who don't know about MSC2716 yet, just accept the "marker" as another random events and do nothing. When they gain the functionality, they can scan their existing events and fix up their world. The extra `historical` field in power levels doesn't affect any of the other fields.

A new room version is clunky because it requires a whole new room. And it will require two new rooms if we plan to use it in the Gitter rooms to go to experimental, then back to stable. And requires re-importing the history each time unless we want to rely on the tombstone successor logic in clients to pick it up (seems too complicated when we get into historical messages as well).

If a new room version is truly required, it feels like there should be a better spec mechanism to add things like this.

Reviewer 4: I think there are a few things here:

* We need to control who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.chunk`, and `m.room.marker` events: we can already control this using current power levels, but the current defaults mean that anyone will be able to send those events by default, which is probably not ideal.  We could change the default PLs when new rooms get created, but old rooms would stay the same.
* We need to control whose `m.room.insertion`, etc. events get interpreted as "insertion", etc events: only certain users' `m.room.insertion` events should have special meaning.  Ideally, the set of users who can send `m.room.insertion` events should be the same as the set of users whose `m.room.insertion` events actually mean something.  But we may be able to get away with allowing everyone to send those events, and only interpreting certain users' events as actually meaningful some way, which would sort of solve the first issue.  I think this is what you mean by old homeservers "accept the 'marker' as another random event and do nothing", and then when they learn about this, they can "scan their existing events and fix up their world".
* However, if we add a new `historical` field, we would probably want to preserve that field in the redaction algorithm, which means we'd need a new room version.
* We might be able to work around that by doing something strange like say "If the PL event doesn't specify a PL required for `m.room.insertion`, then anyone can send the event, but we only interpret those events from users with PL >= 50.  If the PL event does specify a PL required for `m.room.insertion`, then we will interpret any such events that were allowed to be sent."  However, that seems a bit kludgy to me, and I suspect will end up with a lot of edge cases (e.g. what happens if the PLs for `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.chunk`, and `m.room.marker` are all different?)
* This feature is a significant change in the room's behaviour, and it may be beneficial to ensure that only homeservers that understand these events will be exposed to rooms that contain these events.  For example, if I'm running an old homeserver and go to a Gitter room that uses this, and I scroll to (what I think is) the beginning of the room history, then my client will think that it's at the beginning of the room and will stop asking for older messages.  Then if my homeserver gets upgraded, it has no way of telling the client "actually, now there's more messages", and I'll be stuck thinking that I've reached the beginning of the room.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for taking a look @uhoreg!

Any preference on using `events` power-level vs a new `historical` power-level? Both are compatible and I leaned towards `historical` since it seemed a little more easy to use and straight-forward as a room admin.

---

> However, if we add a new `historical` field, we would probably want to preserve that field in the redaction algorithm, which means we'd need a new room version.

To be clear, I assume we are talking about the `historical` field on `m.room.power_levels`. I'm clarifying because there is also `m.historical` field added to all events as an optional indicator.

The redaction algorithm stuff seems like the only hard requirement for a new room version because we need to make sure the event signing for the power-level event is the same for all homeservers? I'm looking at the [`prune_event_dict`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/search?q=prune_event_dict) stuff in Synapse where we use the pruned/redacted version of the event to sign and verify. Is this the correct way to think about it? I'm not sure since https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/appendices/#signing-json doesn't mention the pruned event being necessary besides popping off a few fields.

Related issues:

 - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/1237
     - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10232

---

> This feature is a significant change in the room's behaviour, and it may be beneficial to ensure that only homeservers that understand these events will be exposed to rooms that contain these events.

I don't think it's necessary to exclude them. They can still participate in the "live" discussion no problem. The history wasn't available to them before and their server not understanding MSC2716 to see the history is the same result. The history is auxiliary to the current content.

This relates to being leery of a new room version. The room is backwards compatible but if we try to use an unstable room version for the Gitter rooms, no servers will support that and won't be able to access the content. So we essentially have to wait for everything to become stable before we can use it with Gitter. Is there any sort of fallback room version logic so people can still look at the room?

If we're trying to use this before being stable, I already assume we would have to import the history twice, since the "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" event types have unstable prefixes which won't be interpreted in the future.

> Then if my homeserver gets upgraded, it has no way of telling the client "actually, now there's more messages", and I'll be stuck thinking that I've reached the beginning of the room.

This seems like more of a migration problem. When your homeserver becomes MSC2716 aware, it could look for any `m.room.marker` events sent in the room and know where all of the history is.

The client just keeps calling `/messages` as you scroll up and will have the history next time.

Reviewer 3: The major thing that requires a new room version here is the changes to the event auth algorithm, which in turn means we should change the redaction rules (since in the auth code we want to only use fields in events that wouldn't be removed during redaction).

@MadLittleMods is right that changing the auth rules for existing room versions in such a way is likely not to cause any issues, beyond servers not being able to pull in the imported history (though we *can't* do that for the redaction algorithm, as that will change the signatures and event IDs). However, I'm loathed to start doing that as getting it wrong can cause different servers' view of the room to diverge.

One way of getting this feature into existing room versions is instead of changing the auth rules we'd instead only process the insertion/marker events that are sent by the creator of the room? Or some such very pared down version of the auth rules? That hopefully should be enough to support the basic use cases for existing rooms, while doing it "properly" for newer rooms?

> Any preference on using `events` power-level vs a new `historical` power-level? Both are compatible and I leaned towards `historical` since it seemed a little more easy to use and straight-forward as a room admin.

Personally I think a new `historical` key makes sense, as its more clearly defining intent.

> Is there any sort of fallback room version logic so people can still look at the room?

Unfortunately not, as the server doesn't technically even know how to deserialize the event. In the future we could potentially add extra metadata such as "this room version is basically like that room version" to allow it, but it feels a bit convoluted.

> This relates to being leery of a new room version. The room is backwards compatible but if we try to use an unstable room version for the Gitter rooms, no servers will support that and won't be able to access the content.

As a vaguely unhelpful aside, the way to get new features into existing rooms is to "just" upgrade them, but that doesn't work in this instance as we're trying to use the new feature to add stuff to the *start* of the room, rather than for new events.

Reviewer 2: > One way of getting this feature into existing room versions is instead of changing the auth rules we'd instead only process the insertion/marker events that are sent by the creator of the room? [...] That hopefully should be enough to support the basic use cases for existing rooms, while doing it "properly" for newer rooms?

Discussed this a bit [out of band](https://matrix.to/#/!vYjRCIoySolvxmhMJE:matrix.org/$FQjaE1tO2DHXHf1diQbBfSClJfqzlmUEJZICY1EqR8g?via=half-shot.uk&via=matrix.org&via=vector.modular.im) and this is the solution we're going with ⏩ 

Added a "Backwards compatibility" section to explain this further 👍

 - When redacting `m.room.marker` events, keep the `m.marker.insertion` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.power_levels` events, keep the `historical` content field around

#### Backwards compatibility

However, this MSC is mostly backwards compatible and can be used with the
current room version with the fact that redactions aren't supported for
`m.room.insertion`, `m.room.chunk`, `m.room.marker` events. We can protect
people from this limitation by throwing an error when they try to use `PUT
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/redact/{eventId}/{txnId}` to redact one of
those events. We would have to accept the redaction if it came over federation
to avoid split-brained rooms.

Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
send these events in the existing room version, we instead only allow the room
`creator` to send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.chunk`, and `m.room.chunk` events.

### New historical batch send endpoint

Add a new endpoint, `POST
/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event=<eventID>&chunk_id=<chunkID>`,
which can insert a chunk of events historically back in time next to the given

> `prev_event`. This endpoint can only be used by application services. 

Reviewer 2: We can update the `prev_event` query parameter -> `prev_event_id` to be more obvious

Reviewer 2: Added to MSC ⏩

from `next_chunk_id` in the response of the batch send endpoint. `next_chunk_id`
is derived from the insertion events added to each chunk and is not required for
the first batch send.

Request body:
```json
{
    "state_events_at_start": [{
      "type": "m.room.member",
      "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
      "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
      "content": {
          "membership": "join"
      },
      "state_key": "@someone:matrix.org"
    }],
    "events": [
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message1"
        },
      },
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message2"
        },
      }
    ],
}
```

Request response:
```jsonc
{
  "state_events": [
    // list of state event ID's we inserted...
  ],
  // List of historical event ID's we inserted which includes the
  // auto-generated insertion and chunk events...

>   "events": [

Reviewer: Another thought, event IDs aren't very helpful on their own unless. I.e. I'd like to know which of the returned event_ids map to which events that were created. Otherwise, my application is going to need to do a /event lookup for each event_id which could end up being **quite** a few roundtrips for a large bulk insertion.

Could we either:
- Return a object of {event_id, type} for each eventId
- Be a bit more verbose (but ultimately, this might be fine if we're considering this endpoint for appservices/high bandwidth) and include the full event body as a response. .e.g. [{event_id, sender, content, origin_server_ts}] etc.

Reviewer 5: Probably most efficient to either add some client-specified identifier for each event, or require the output event id array to have the same indexes as the input (and have separate fields for auto-generated event ids)

Reviewer: >or require the output event id array to have the same indexes as the input (and have separate fields for auto-generated event ids)

I like that one.

Reviewer 2: > or require the output event id array to have the same indexes as the input (and have separate fields for auto-generated event ids)

Could be the following? I separated the insertion events because I don't know which way to sort them to make it intuitive otherwise.

```json
{
  "state_event_ids": [],
  "event_ids": [],
  "next_chunk_id": [],
  "insertion_event_id": "",
  "chunk_event_id": "",
  "base_insertion_event_id": "(optional field only returned if created)"
}
```

Reviewer 2: Updated in https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10777 (https://github.com/matrix-org/complement/pull/204)

Reviewer 2: Added to MSC ⏩

endpoints. We could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}`
with `?historical=true` which would create the floating outlier state events.
Then we could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`,
with `?prev_event` pointing at that floating state to auth the event and where we
want to insert the event.

Another way of doing this might be to store the different eras of the room as
different versions of the room, using `m.room.tombstone` events to form a linked
list of the eras. This has the advantage of isolating room state between
different eras of the room, simplifying state resolution calculations and
avoiding risk of any cross-talk.  It's also easier to reason about, and avoids
exposing the DAG to bridge developers.  However, it would require better
presentation of room versions in clients, and it would require support for
retrospectively specifying the `predecessor` of the current room when you
retrospectively import history.  Currently `predecessor` is in the immutable
`m.room.create` event of a room, so cannot be changed retrospectively - and

> doing so in a safe and race-free manner sounds Hard. A big problem with this

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
doing so in a safe and race-free manner sounds hard. A big problem with this
```

# MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms

## Problem

Matrix has historically been unable to easily import existing history into a
room that already exists. This is a major problem when bridging existing
conversations into Matrix, particularly if the scrollback is being
incrementally or lazily imported.

For instance, an NNTP bridge might work by letting a user join a room that
maps to a given newsgroup, first showing an empty room, and then importing the
most recent 1000 newsgroup posts for that room to flesh out some history.  The
bridge might then choose to slowly import additional posts for that newsgroup
in the background, until however many decades of backfill were complete.
Finally, as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually
gradually added into the history of the room - slowly building up the complete
history of the conversations over time.

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to set historical room state in a room via the CS or AS API -

>    you can only edit current room state.

Reviewer 2: This feels like it isn't relevant to the current batch send proposal as we don't change this with the batch send approach. The state we use to auth is never resolved into the current state.

Reviewer 2: Removed ⏩

 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * There is currently no way to override the timestamp on an event via the AS API.
   (We used to have the concept of [timestamp
   massaging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/application_service/r0.1.2#timestamp-massaging),
   but it never got properly specified)

## Proposal

### Expectation

Historical messages that we insert should appear in the timeline just like they
would if they were sent back at that time.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

### Overview

**Endpoint:**

>  - `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event=<eventID>&chunk_id=<chunkID>`

Reviewer 2: `/batch_send` isn't very descriptive that this can only really be used to send messages back in time. Should we rename it to `/historical_batch_send`?

Reviewer 7: I think "historical" may have the connotation of "before all of the events in the room". I know that mautrix/whatsapp is using the `batch_send` endpoint for catching up to the current time from the most recent message in a room in the case where you log out, messages are sent, and then you log back in again, so I'm not sure if historical is the best term here.

>  - `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event=<eventID>&chunk_id=<chunkID>`

Reviewer 2: Where does the final endpoint live at?

Also `/batch_send` isn't very descriptive that this can only really be used to send messages back in time. Should we rename it to `/historical_batch_send`?

**Event types:**

 - `m.room.insertion`: Events that mark points in time where you can insert
   historical messages
 - `m.room.chunk`: This is what connects one historical chunk to the other. In
   the DAG, we navigate from an insertion event to the chunk event that points
   at it, up the historical messages to the insertion event, then repeat the
   process
 - `m.room.marker`: Used to hint to homeservers (and potentially to cache bust
   on clients) that there is new history back time that you should go fetch next
   time someone scrolls back around the specified insertion event.

**Content fields:**

>  - `m.historical` (`[true|false]`): Used on any event to indicate they were

Reviewer 2: *typo

```suggestion
 - `m.historical` (`[true|false]`): Used on any event to indicate that they were
```

   historically imported after the fact
 - `m.next_chunk_id` (`string`): This is a random unique string for a
   `m.room.insertion` event to indicate what ID the next "chunk" event should
   specify in order to connect to it

>  - `m.chunk_id` (`string`): Used on `m.room.chunk` events to indicate which

Reviewer 2: Should we rename `chunk_id` -> `batch_id` to better align with endpoint, `/batch_send`?

Reviewer 2: Changed in Synapse via https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10838

   `m.room.insertion` event it connects to by its `m.next_chunk_id` field
 - `m.marker.insertion` (another `event_id` string): For `m.room.marker` events
   to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by `event_id`

**Power level:**

Since events being silently sent in the past is hard to moderate, it will
probably be good to limit who can add historical messages to the timeline. The
batch send endpoint is already limited to application services but we also need
to limit who can send "insertion", "chunk", and "marker" events since someone
can attempt to send them via the normal `/send` API (we don't want any nasty
weird knots to reconcile either).

 - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.chunk`,

>    and `m.room.marker` in the room.

Reviewer 2: Should this be defaulted to `100`?

from `next_chunk_id` in the response of the batch send endpoint. `next_chunk_id`
is derived from the insertion events added to each chunk and is not required for
the first batch send.

Request body:
```json
{
    "state_events_at_start": [{
      "type": "m.room.member",
      "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
      "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
      "content": {
          "membership": "join"
      },
      "state_key": "@someone:matrix.org"
    }],
    "events": [
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message1"
        },
      },
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message2"
        },
      }
    ],
}
```

Request response:
```jsonc
{
  "state_events": [
    // list of state event ID's we inserted...
  ],
  // List of historical event ID's we inserted which includes the
  // auto-generated insertion and chunk events...

>   "events": [

Reviewer 2: `state_events` and `events` are actually list of event ID's? Should we update those fields to be `state_event_ids` and `event_ids` respectively?

Reviewer: I would favour this. We use event_id in the C-S spec so it would be good to keep that format.

Reviewer: I would favour this. We use event_id in the C-S spec so it would be good to keep that format.

Reviewer 2: Added to MSC ⏩

history in the DAG. We also only want to auth events against fields that
wouldn't be removed during redaction. In practice, this means:

 - When redacting `m.room.insertion` events, keep the `m.next_batch_id` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.batch` events, keep the `m.batch_id` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.marker` events, keep the `m.marker.insertion` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.power_levels` events, keep the `historical` content field around

#### Backwards compatibility

However, this MSC is mostly backwards compatible and can be used with the
current room version with the fact that redactions aren't supported for
`m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, `m.room.marker` events. We can protect
people from this limitation by throwing an error when they try to use `PUT
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/redact/{eventId}/{txnId}` to redact one of
those events. We would have to accept the redaction if it came over federation
to avoid split-brained rooms.

Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
send these events in the existing room version, we instead only allow the room

> `creator` to send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and `m.room.marker` events.

Reviewer 8: What about if I send these events on a homeserver that doesn't know it should have these restrictions, and then the events come in over federation to one that does?

I wonder if this instead means you should only *process* them in that case.

Reviewer 2: > I wonder if this instead means you should only process them in that case.

@reivilibre 👍 That's what happens:

 - Skip processing an insertion event: [`synapse/storage/databases/main/events.py#L1843-L1857`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/8b7b371ff699b420fec97a913264aaaf4ba618c8/synapse/storage/databases/main/events.py#L1843-L1857)
 - Skip processing a batch event: [`synapse/storage/databases/main/events.py#L1904-L1918`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/8b7b371ff699b420fec97a913264aaaf4ba618c8/synapse/storage/databases/main/events.py#L1904-L1918)
 - Skip processing marker event: [`synapse/handlers/federation_event.py#L1129-L1138`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/8b7b371ff699b420fec97a913264aaaf4ba618c8/synapse/handlers/federation_event.py#L1129-L1138) (this one is in a handler because it does some extra fetching and not just persisting in the database)

Reviewer 2: Let me know if the update below clarifies this enough now ⏩  https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716/#discussion_r834739197

> Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
> send these events in the existing room version, we instead only allow the room
> `creator` to send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and `m.room.marker` events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
send these events in the existing room version, we instead only process the
 `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and `m.room.marker` events when the
 room `creator` sends them.
```

        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message1"
        },
      },
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message2"
        },
      }
    ],
}
```

Request response:
```jsonc
{
  // List of state event ID's we inserted
  "state_event_ids": [
    // member state event ID
  ],
  // List of historical event ID's we inserted
  "event_ids": [
    // historical message1 event ID
    // historical message2 event ID
  ],
  "next_batch_id": "random-unique-string",
  "insertion_event_id": "$X9RSsCPKu5gTVIJCoDe6HeCmsrp6kD31zXjMRfBCADE",
  "batch_event_id": "$kHspK8a5kQN2xkTJMDWL-BbmeYVYAloQAA9QSLOsOZ4",
  // When `?batch_id` isn't provided, the homeserver automatically creates an
  // insertion event as a starting place to hang the history off of. This automatic
  // insertion event ID is returned in this field.
  //
  // When `?batch_id` is provided, this field is not present because we can hang

>   // the history off the insertione event specified associated by the batch ID. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  // the history off the insertion event specified associated by the batch ID. 
```

  // the history off the insertion event specified and associated by the batch ID.
  "base_insertion_event_id": "$pmmaTamxhcyLrrOKSrJf3c1zNmfvsE5SGpFpgE_UvN0"
}
```

`state_events_at_start` is used to define the historical state events needed to
auth the `events` like invite and join events. These events can float outside of
the normal DAG. In Synapse, these are called `outlier`'s and won't be visible in
the chat history which also allows us to insert multiple batches without having a
bunch of `@mxid joined the room` noise between each batch. **The state will not
be resolved into the current state of the room.**

`events` is a chronological list of events you want to insert. For Synapse,
there is a reverse-chronological constraint on batches so once you insert one
batch of messages, you can only insert older an older batch after that. **tldr;

> Insert from your most recent batch of history -> oldest history.**

Reviewer 2: One aspect that isn't solved yet is how to handle relations/annotations (such as reactions, replies, and threaded conversations) that reference each other within a batch because they don't have `event_ids` to reference before being persisted.

## String interpolation templating

As suggested by [@Half-Shot](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KCEmpnGr4J-I8EeaVQ8QJZKBDu53ViI7V62y5BzfXr0/edit#bookmark=id.x0yt64o05bpv) and [@tulir](https://matrix.to/#/!SBYNQlpqkwJzFIdzxI:nevarro.space/$bBYJ6hwQb3tfoq365k-l9r1HrCrEys4mJ8TMislog0U?via=nevarro.space&via=beeper.com&via=matrix.org) (internal out-of-band links), one option could be to have some special string interpolation syntax to reference previous events in the batch. Events are processed in chronological order (oldest to most recent) so there wouldn't be any circular problems (you can't reference an event that comes after the current one).

ex. first event has `batch_message_id: "foo"` in `unsigned`, then second message has `in_reply_to: "foo"` which gets replaced with the actual `event_id` of the first event when processed. We probably want "foo" to be a bit more special so it could be replaced in any field.

Is there any prior art or similar systems that handle this well?

## Use message edits

This method uses message edits to add whatever relations were expected after everything has been imported and has an `event_id` to reference.

I've explored this route in my initial pass of the Gitter history import script, https://gitlab.com/gitterHQ/webapp/-/merge_requests/2229#note_659864130 which works but I don't think we really want to use this route. The idea is to import everything in two passes. The first pass imports every non-threaded message to have them available as thread parents for the next pass. The second pass iterates over each thread and imports all the messages for it in one batch.

This is pretty cumbersome to manage, inefficient, and has the downside of marking all of the messages as edited.

## Pre-calculate `event_ids`

Since `event_ids` are a cryptographic hashes of the event itself, another option I thought about was pre-calculating the `event_id` of a message before it's persisted on homeserver, https://gitlab.com/gitterHQ/webapp/-/merge_requests/2229#note_672980573. This would be pretty slick if it was easy but turns out to be too tricky to calculate in the first place and this logic would need to be written for all platforms that wanted to import messages.

 - Room v3 (event ID from hash), https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v3/#event-ids
 - Room v4 (event ID from hash with URL safe base64), https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v4/#event-ids
 - https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/server-server-api/#calculating-the-reference-hash-for-an-event
 - Canonical JSON

> In terms of pre-calculating the `event_id` before sending, the tricky fields look like they would be `origin_server_ts`, `depth`, `auth_events`, and `prev_events`.
> 
>  - For `origin_server_ts`, we luckily know and can control it with the `/batch_send` endpoint. 
>  - For `depth`, we can fetch the given `?prev_event` from the server API and know that the depth is inherited from insider knowledge of the implementation in Synapse
>  - For `auth_events`, we would have fetch necessary existing auth events to pre-calculate `event_id`'s of `state_events_at_start`
>  - For `prev_events`, we would have to reference the previous message in the chunk after pre-calculating it before.
> 
> Sounds like a bit of a headache 😵

Reviewer 7: Here's a possibly not horrible modification to the "String interpolation templating" option: specify a path to the key in `content` where the event ID should go. This avoids having to deal with string interpolation and crazy escaping and other edge cases that are sure to follow.

<details>
<summary>Example of a message with a :+1: reaction:</summary>

```
[
  {
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
    "content": {
      "msgtype": "m.text",
      "body": "Historical message1"
    },
    "unsigned": {
      "batch_message_id": "something unique"
    }
  },
  {
    "content": {
      "m.relates_to": {
        "key": "👍️",
        "rel_type": "m.annotation"
      }
    },
    "insert_batch_message_event_id": {
      "at": ["m.relates_to", "event_id"],
      "batch_message_id": "something unique"
    },
    "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
    "sender": "@someone_else:matrix.org",
    "type": "m.reaction"
  }
]
```

</details>

Note the new `insert_batch_message_event_id.at` key that specifies where in the `content` dictionary to put the event ID and the `insert_batch_message_event_id.batch_message_id` key that specifies the `batch_message_id` to reference.

This option intentionally does not allow the event ID to be interpolated into a key. It must be its own key.

-----

Another probably even more horrible idea than the above: what if events could be nested in some sort of special `related` list? This has the advantage of not having to keep track of batch message IDs.

<details>
<summary>Same example as above with this probably worse idea:</summary>

```
{
  "type": "m.room.message",
  "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
  "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
  "content": {
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "body": "Historical message1"
  },
  "related": [
    {
      "content": {
        "m.relates_to": {
          "key": "👍️",
          "rel_type": "m.annotation"
        }
      },
      "content_event_id_insertion_key_path": ["m.relates_to", "event_id"],
      "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
      "sender": "@someone_else:matrix.org",
      "type": "m.reaction"
    }
  ]
}
```

</details>

I think the problem here is that this doesn't allow you to specify multiple parent event IDs. I think that could cause issues with threads?

----

Lastly, if it is deemed absolutely necessary to have event ID interpolation inside keys, I suggest doing a more declarative version of string interpolation with a `template` dictionary where the template string and insertion location are separate keys (as this avoids having to deal with lots of annoying escaping issues).

<details><summary>Something like:</summary>

```
"template": {
  "str": "event ID is >><<",
  "insert_event_id_after_char": 14
}
```

</details>

Reviewer 2: For reference, @sumnerevans and I also chatted about his declarative idea further in the Matrix spec room, https://matrix.to/#/!NasysSDfxKxZBzJJoE:matrix.org/$fd_lUyE9w6Xt33qTeS7NlXQiCizUv7u_S0NUeg8NX5o?via=matrix.org&via=libera.chat&via=element.io (some thoughts around handling keys, arrays, maps, and making the language more clear)

Reviewer 9: I strongly recommend descoping this to a separate MSC.

Reviewer 2: We can ⏩ Added a note about this caveat and we can handle in another MSC.

Trying to use this practically without some solution here feels really bad though

    batch1-batch -.-> batch0-insertion
    batch2-batch -.-> batch1-insertion

    %% alignment links 
    batch2-insertion --- alignment1
    %% make the alignment links/nodes invisible
    style alignment1 visibility: hidden,color:transparent;
    linkStyle 17 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;
```

The structure of the insertion event looks like:
```js
{
  "type": "m.room.insertion",
  "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
  "content": {
    "m.next_batch_id": next_batch_id,
    "m.historical": true
  },
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  // Doesn't affect much but good to use the same time as the closest event
  "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639
}
```

The structure of the batch event looks like:
```js
{
  "type": "m.room.batch",
  "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
  "content": {
    "m.batch_id": batch_id,
    "m.historical": true
  },
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  // Doesn't affect much but good to use the same time as the closest event
  "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639
}
```

#### Adding marker events

Finally, we add "marker" events into the mix so that federated remote servers

> also know where in the DAG they should look for historical messages.

Reviewer 2: It's also important for the local server too now.

> We no longer find connected insertion events by finding a potential `prev_event` connection to the current event we're iterating over. We now solely rely on marker events which when processed, add the insertion event as an extremity and the federating homeserver can ask about it when time calls.
> * Related discussion, [Fix historical messages backfilling in random order on remote homeservers (MSC2716) #11114 (comment)](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/11114#discussion_r741514793)
>
> *-- https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/11114*

Reviewer 2: Maybe I confused myself here. It will work locally because of the `depth` and `stream_ordering`.

      room backfilled, the user leaves, a "marker" event is sent, more messages
      put it back in the timeline, the user joins back, jumps back in the
      timeline and misses the "marker" and expects to see the historical
      messages. They will be missing the historical messages until they can
      backfill the gap where they left.
 - A "marker" event is not needed for every batch of historical messages added
   via `/batch_send`. Multiple batches can be inserted then once we're done
   importing everything, we can add one "marker" event pointing at the root
   "insertion" event
    - If more history is decided to be added later, another "marker" can be sent to let the homeservers know again.
 - When a remote federated homeserver, receives a "marker" event, it can mark
   the "insertion" prev events as needing to backfill from that point again and
   can fetch the historical messages when the user scrolls back to that area in
   the future.

The structure of the "marker" event looks like:
```js
{
    "type": "m.room.marker",
    "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
    "content": {
        "m.insertion_id": insertion_event.event_id,

>         "m.historical": true

Reviewer 2: We should remove the `"m.historical": true` field on `marker` events.

The `marker` event isn't historical as it's sent in the "live" timeline to point back at the historical stuff.

>         "m.insertion_id": insertion_event.event_id

Reviewer 5: This field seems to have been renamed at some point

```suggestion
        "m.marker.insertion": insertion_event.event_id
```

Reviewer 2: `m.marker.insertion` (`org.matrix.msc2716.marker.insertion`) is the correct one.

It would be nice to have a less confusing name for this field as neither seems great to me.

Reviewer 2: Updated 👍

approach is if you just want to inject a few old lost messages - eg if you're
importing a mail or newsgroup archive and you stumble across a lost mbox with a
few msgs in retrospect, you wouldn't want or be able to splice a whole new room
in with tombstones.

Another way could be to let the server who issued the `m.room.create` also go
and retrospectively insert events into the room outside the context of the DAG
(i.e. without parent prev_events or signatures).  To quote the original
[bug](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/698#issuecomment-259478116):

> You could just create synthetic events which look like normal DAG events but
  exist before the m.room.create event. Their signatures and prev-events would
  all be missing, but they would be blindly trusted based on the HS who is
  allowed to serve them (based on metadata in the m.room.create event). Thus
  you'd have a perimeter in the DAG beyond which events are no longer
  decentralised or signed, but are blindly trusted to let HSes insert ancient
  history provided by ASes.

However, this feels needlessly complicated if the DAG approach is sufficient.

> ## Security considerations

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we want to disallow people creating events with `origin_server_ts` in the future.

Although people might have creative use cases for this and doesn't seem harmful to let people do it in their own rooms 🤷

Reviewer 5: Are you suggesting adding a new field that would override the display timestamp? (which might be a nice idea, but also a fairly breaking change)

Anyway, `origin_server_ts` is fundamentally untrustworthy over federation since time doesn't exist in a decentralized context, homeserver admins will always be able to spoof the timestamp in any room.

Reviewer 2: > Are you suggesting adding a new field that would override the display timestamp? (which might be a nice idea, but also a fairly breaking change)

I'm just making sure the point is known clearly that the `origin_server_ts` can be whatever including the future which hasn't happened. It's still sorted by `depth` and `stream_ordering` like any other message. I'm leaning towards not limiting `origin_server_ts` at all.

Reviewer 5: Oh, I should've read those three words at the end too :D

Security considerations about custom timestamps are probably more relevant for MSC3316, which just says timestamps are already untrusted over federation, and appservices are already fully trusted locally, so it doesn't matter.

maps to a given newsgroup, first showing an empty room, and then importing the
most recent 1000 newsgroup posts for that room to flesh out some history.  The
bridge might then choose to slowly import additional posts for that newsgroup
in the background, until however many decades of backfill were complete.
Finally, as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually
gradually added into the history of the room - slowly building up the complete
history of the conversations over time.

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * There is currently no way to override the timestamp on an event via the AS API.
   (We used to have the concept of [timestamp
   massaging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/application_service/r0.1.2#timestamp-massaging),
   but it never got properly specified)

## Proposal

### Expectation

Historical messages that we insert should appear in the timeline just like they
would if they were sent back at that time.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

> ![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

Reviewer 10: images should be referenced from within the repo: `![element example](./images/2716-scrollback-example.png)` for example.

(please also include alt text)

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the example 👍

> ![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

Reviewer 9: I'm not really sure what this image is showing me, not helped by the fact that only one of the messages is showing a timestamp.

Presumably the "historical" events are those imported via `/batch_send` ? But are they chronologically older or newer than message 100 and message 0?  Presumably older, otherwise they wouldn't have needed importing... but then why are they appearing at this point in the timeline? 

For that matter, what am I meant to infer from the fact that message 0 happens after message 100?

Reviewer 2: I've updated to something more clear:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/183826954-c27069d2-75ea-49a2-a1ee-ab51a625dc2c.png)

---

The previous image was just a quick snapshot from one of the Complement tests. In case you're curious, here is how it worked:

Before import:
```
[message0-199]
[message0-199]
```

After import:
```
[message0-199]
[historical0-2 (chunk 1)]
[historical0-2 (chunk 0)]
[message0-199]
```

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

### Overview

**Endpoint:**

>  - `POST /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<eventID>&batch_id=<batchID>`

Reviewer 10: The endpoint versioning scheme has changed since this MSC was opened:
```suggestion
 - `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<eventID>&batch_id=<batchID>`
```

> **Event types:**

Reviewer 2: Any example to base this off of? Seems like a big table

> **Event types:**

Reviewer 11: Well, the table would only hold the possible `content` fields. Something like https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/43d224accc81a8335305d22790f7eb1d61f282f8/proposals/3672-ephemeral-location-streaming.md#proposal.

> **Event types:**

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the example! Updated to that format ✅

 - `m.room.insertion`: Events that mark points in time where you can insert
   historical messages
 - `m.room.batch`: This is what connects one historical batch to the other. In
   the DAG, we navigate from an insertion event to the batch event that points
   at it, up the historical messages to the insertion event, then repeat the
   process
 - `m.room.marker`: State event used to hint to homeservers that there is new
   history back time that you should go fetch next time someone scrolls back
   around the specified insertion event. Also used  on clients to cache bust the

>    timeline.

Reviewer 9: Am I right in understanding that these events only have meaning on the server that created them, and remote servers that pull them in over federation should treat them much as any other timeline event?

Reviewer 2: Marker events are specifically meant for federated servers to consume so they know that the now history exists and there is more to fetch at that point in time. See the "Adding marker events" for the various use cases of the different consumers.

**Content fields:**

 - `m.historical` (`[true|false]`): Used on any event to indicate that it was
   historically imported after the fact
 - `m.next_batch_id` (`string`): This is a random unique string for a
   `m.room.insertion` event to indicate what ID the next "batch" event should
   specify in order to connect to it
 - `m.batch_id` (`string`): Used on `m.room.batch` events to indicate which
   `m.room.insertion` event it connects to by its `m.next_batch_id` field
 - `m.marker.insertion` (another `event_id` string): For `m.room.marker` events

>    to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by `event_id`

Reviewer 2: I can update to whatever is preferred (suggest away)

>    to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by `event_id`

Reviewer 9: just `historical`, `next_batch_id`, etc.

>    to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by `event_id`

Reviewer 2: Updated to remove the `m.` prefixes in all stable content fields ✅

For the unstable, I think we just need to keep `org.matrix.msc2716.historical` because it applies to all events.

**Power level:**

Since events being silently sent in the past is hard to moderate, it will
probably be good to limit who can add historical messages to the timeline. The
batch send endpoint is already limited to application services but we also need
to limit who can send "insertion", "batch", and "marker" events since someone
can attempt to send them via the normal `/send` API (we don't want any nasty
weird knots to reconcile either).

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 2: This was discussed at https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10245#discussion_r669982205,

> Using the [` m.room.power_levels` -> `events`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-power-levels) ("The level required to send specific event types. This is a mapping from event type to power level required.") field seems perfect 🎉 
> 
> But we would probably want to default the power level for those events in existing rooms which don't have it set yet. Maybe default to only the creator or admins can do it if not explicitly set in power levels. **Or keep it simple and not allow the history based events at all unless the power level was set.** Is there any precedent for this? There is `events_default` but it's usually set low to allow any events.
>
> *-- @MadLittleMods*

---

The problem is the unset `events` PL scenario. We don't want to accept and give meaning to everyone who sends a `m.room.insertion` just because the PL `events` wasn't filled in.

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 11: > Or keep it simple and not allow the history based events at all unless the power level was set.

I suppose the real problem is that you can't enforce this in older room versions. You could do so in the Synapse implementation, but other homeservers won't deny these events from being sent, thus causing a split-brain scenario.

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 2: > So perhaps trying to make this work with older room versions is fruitless?

Is the `creator` only restriction not viable?

If necessary, we can drop existing room version support. It does lend itself nicely to the Gitter bridge use case where `@gitter-badger:gitter.im` can import all of the history (the time known as `[before-gitter-bridge]`) into the Matrix room where all the activity has been happening in so far (the time known as `[after-gitter-bridge]`). If we had to create a new room for history, then there is a problem of the existing native Matrix activity (`[after-gitter-bridge]`) being lost since we can't puppet a non-`gitter.im` user from the bridge to post the messages in the new room. And we can't update the `m.room.create` `predecessor` of the current room to point to the history room.

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 9: I am also unenthusiastic about a `historical` key, since it feels like we can solve this with the existing properties

> The problem is the unset `events` PL scenario. We don't want to accept and give meaning to everyone who sends a `m.room.insertion` just because the PL `events` wasn't filled in.

If you require `historical`, you'll need a new room version, so it doesn't help you solve it for existing rooms anyway. So in that new room version, why not spec that servers must include a setting for `m.room.insertion` when creating rooms of that version?

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 9: > Is the `creator` only restriction not viable?

I don't understand this question.

>  - `historical`: This controls who can send `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`,

Reviewer 2: > If you require `historical`, you'll need a new room version, so it doesn't help you solve it for existing rooms anyway. So in that new room version, why not spec that servers must include a setting for `m.room.insertion` when creating rooms of that version?

That works. Is that a pattern/precedent set anywhere else?

What does require mean? A power-level event can't exist without it and is rejected by the auth rules if they are missing?

---

> > Is the `creator` only restriction not viable?
> 
> I don't understand this question.

This is in regards to supporting MSC2716 imports in existing room versions. See the [*Backwards compatibility with existing room versions*](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/matthew/msc2716/proposals/2716-batch-send-historical-messages.md#backwards-compatibility-with-existing-room-versions) section,

> #### Backwards compatibility with existing room versions
> 
> However, this MSC is mostly backwards compatible and can be used with the
> current room version with the fact that redactions aren't supported for
> `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, `m.room.marker` events. We can protect
> people from this limitation by throwing an error when they try to use [`PUT
> /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/redact/{eventId}/{txnId}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#put_matrixclientv3roomsroomidredacteventidtxnid)
> to redact one of those events. We would have to accept the redaction if
> it came over federation to avoid split-brained rooms.
> 
> Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
> send these events in the existing room version, we always persist but instead
> only process and give meaning to the `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and
> `m.room.marker` events when the room `creator` sends them. This caveat/rule only
> applies to existing room versions.

   and `m.room.marker` in the room.

**Room version:**

> The redaction algorithm changes are the only hard requirement for a new room

Reviewer 2: Added a note for this 👍

wouldn't be removed during redaction. In practice, this means:

 - When redacting `m.room.insertion` events, keep the `m.next_batch_id` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.batch` events, keep the `m.batch_id` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.marker` events, keep the `m.marker.insertion` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.power_levels` events, keep the `historical` content field around

#### Backwards compatibility

However, this MSC is mostly backwards compatible and can be used with the
current room version with the fact that redactions aren't supported for
`m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, `m.room.marker` events. We can protect
people from this limitation by throwing an error when they try to use `PUT
/_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/redact/{eventId}/{txnId}` to redact one of
those events. We would have to accept the redaction if it came over federation
to avoid split-brained rooms.

Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
send these events in the existing room version, we always persist but instead
only process and give meaning to the `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and

> `m.room.marker` events when the room `creator` sends them.

Reviewer 2: It kinda does already but I added something ⏩

Probably just needs to be worded better in general.

### New historical batch send endpoint

Add a new endpoint, `POST
/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<eventID>&batch_id=<batchID>`,
which can insert a batch of events historically back in time next to the given

> `prev_event_id`. This endpoint can only be used by application services. 

Reviewer 9: I don't understand what `prev_event_id` would be set to here. How does the AS pick such an event?

Reviewer 2: `prev_event_id` is the event you want to insert next to.

From this example graph, the `prev_event_id` would be `A` for each batch. We want to import between `A` and `B`.

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/183793856-ecf503f5-010e-40c3-b3bc-d5144b950377.png)

We end up inheriting the `depth` for the historical events so it sorts topologically between. And ends up as the `prev_event` for the base insertion event.

We also currently, inherit state from the `prev_event_id` but that may change, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r924472086

Maybe it's a misnomer to call it that if it's not obvious. Anything better?

This endpoint will handle the complexity of creating "insertion" and "batch"
events. All the application service has to do is use `?batch_id` which comes
from `next_batch_id` in the response of the batch send endpoint. `next_batch_id`
is derived from the insertion events added to each batch and is not required for
the first batch send.

Request body:
```json
{
    "state_events_at_start": [{
      "type": "m.room.member",
      "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
      "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
      "content": {
          "membership": "join"
      },
      "state_key": "@someone:matrix.org"
    }],
    "events": [
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690333,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message1"
        },
      },
      {
        "type": "m.room.message",
        "sender": "@someone:matrix.org",
        "origin_server_ts": 1628277690334,
        "content": {
          "msgtype": "m.text",
          "body": "Historical message2"
        },
      }

>     ],

Reviewer 9: do we allow state events (such as joins/leaves/profile changes) to be imported in this way, or is it strictly limited to messages?

Reviewer 2: It's not ruled out yet but state events do not currently work in the Synapse implementation, see ["Allow state events to be sent in the `events` list" in the leftover tasks issue](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/10737)

Reviewer 2: I've added a comment that `state_events` are possible to include in `events`

}
```

Request response:

> ```jsonc

Reviewer 10: I tend to suggest json5 for diff syntax highlighting:
```suggestion
```json5
```

{
  // List of state event ID's we inserted
  "state_event_ids": [
    // member state event ID
  ],
  // List of historical event ID's we inserted
  "event_ids": [
    // historical message1 event ID
    // historical message2 event ID
  ],
  "next_batch_id": "random-unique-string",
  "insertion_event_id": "$X9RSsCPKu5gTVIJCoDe6HeCmsrp6kD31zXjMRfBCADE",
  "batch_event_id": "$kHspK8a5kQN2xkTJMDWL-BbmeYVYAloQAA9QSLOsOZ4",
  // When `?batch_id` isn't provided, the homeserver automatically creates an
  // insertion event as a starting place to hang the history off of. This automatic
  // insertion event ID is returned in this field.
  //
  // When `?batch_id` is provided, this field is not present because we can hang
  // the history off the insertion event specified and associated by the batch ID.
  "base_insertion_event_id": "$pmmaTamxhcyLrrOKSrJf3c1zNmfvsE5SGpFpgE_UvN0"
}
```

`state_events_at_start` is used to define the historical state events needed to

> auth the `events` like invite and join events. These events can float outside of

Reviewer 9: how does the AS decide what should be in this list? should it be all the `auth_events` needed for all the events in the `events` list?

Reviewer 9: if an AS imports multiple batches of events, it's more than likely the same sender will appear in multiple batches. Should the server deduplicate somehow?

Reviewer 5: This has been the primary issue with backfilling Telegram chats. It would be much nicer to just pass a list of member events that need to be in the room, plus maybe a user ID that can be used to create invite events if necessary, and have the server figure out what membership events need to be put where. Right now a small mistake in the state events means the whole backfill fails.

Reviewer 2: > should it be all the auth_events needed for all the events in the events list?

It just needs to be the `auth_events` which currently don't exist from where we are inheriting state from. For most cases, that's just member events and invite events for private rooms since the rest is already in the DAG.

> if an AS imports multiple batches of events, it's more than likely the same sender will appear in multiple batches. Should the server deduplicate somehow?

If we think of something slick, that sounds fine. It might work to inherit from the previous batch but then the AS needs to keep track if it's already sent that member event which sounds more annoying.

---

> It would be much nicer to just pass a list of member events that need to be in the room, plus maybe a user ID that can be used to create invite events if necessary

@tulir How do you imagine this exactly? You currently can just pass member events in and they auth as necessary for the historical events.

> the normal DAG. In Synapse, these are called `outlier`'s and won't be visible in

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
the normal DAG. In Synapse, these are called `outlier`s and won't be visible in
```

the chat history which also allows us to insert multiple batches without having a
bunch of `@mxid joined the room` noise between each batch. **The state will not

> be resolved into the current state of the room.**

Reviewer 7: When authenticating historical events, should the `state_events_at_start` be unioned with the current state?

That seems to be the functionality at least with room membership events. However, in my work on https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/13229, the power levels from the current timeline aren't being used. (This causes issues with sending the insertion and batch events if the user is not the room creator.)

Reviewer 5: I think they're unioned with the state at the `prev_event_id` rather than current state

Reviewer 2: It's how @tulir describes 👍 and makes sense what you're running into now.

This does make it difficult to change the power levels of who can send a historical event 🤔. We could inherit state events from the current state of the room ([`synapse/rest/client/room_batch.py#L139-L145`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/47822fd2e863719175ff512ce3e0234135d72ebf/synapse/rest/client/room_batch.py#L139-L145)). I think it might work even though the `prev_event` is still back in time.

Reviewer 7: How should I proceed, then? Deciding what should be unioned blocks https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/13229.

Reviewer 2: @sumnerevans It's an experimental implementation in Synapse. It sounds reasonable to union with the current state (but not resolve `state_events_at_start`  into the current state). You will have to see if that actually works though.

And we will have to think about if there is any negative effects or alternative use case we're missing by going this way instead. Overall, it seems reasonable to do though.

Reviewer 9: Explaining how the `state_events_at_start` maps onto the homeserver's idea of the (complete) room state at the imported batch is absolutely key here. Adding the words "unioned with the state at the `prev_event_id`" to the MSC would be a start, but... assuming you allow state events in the imported data, it sounds like it needs to be more complicated.

Reviewer 2: Added a note that "`state_events_at_start` is unioned with the state at the prev_event_id" and that `state_events` included in `events` will auth further events in the batch (also discussed in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r941498769)

`events` is a chronological list of events you want to insert. For Synapse,
there is a reverse-chronological constraint on batches so once you insert one

> batch of messages, you can only insert older an older batch after that. **tldr;

Reviewer 2: > Is there a reason Synapse has this constraint?

The constraint is because Synapse doesn't have online topological ordering. See the "Depth discussion" in this document.

Since all of the historical messages are at the same `depth` (`topological_ordering`), the only way we can control the ordering in between is the `stream_ordering`. The historical events are `backfilled` which means the `stream_ordering` decrements as you go. So in order to make sure the DAG is sorted as expected when it's linearized, we need to start from the most recent batch to the oldest. It sucks.

> Should we advise other homeserver implementations to do the same? 

No, ideally we would be able to add batches in any order wherever.

> Does Synapse enforce this for batches incoming over federation?

No and we run into sort issues on federated servers because of it.

> Ordering is hard on federated homeservers. Need to backfill in the exact right order to get `stream_ordering` correct. This is fine for normal scrollback but if someone jumps back in time via a permalink, it will start fetching at the permalink and setting the `stream_ordering` for events that should come later, https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/11114#discussion_r731577817

We've punted to have online topological ordering implemented in Synapse magically fix this for us in the future.

> Plan forward
>
> 1. Go forward with https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/11114 so it fixes the scrollback case in federation
> 1. For Gitter and the static archives, we can have a script manually scrollback across all of the rooms in the archive server before anyone else or Google spider crawls in some weird way. This way it will lock the sort in place for all of the historical messages. [Or fetch directly from the `gitter.im` homeserver, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-public-archive/issues/5]
> 1. Online topological ordering can happen in the future and by its nature will apply retroactively to fix any inconsistencies introduced by people permalinking
>
> *-- ([internal doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KCEmpnGr4J-I8EeaVQ8QJZKBDu53ViI7V62y5BzfXr0/edit#bookmark=id.y9550gpce6k3))*

> batch of messages, you can only insert older an older batch after that. **tldr;

Reviewer 2: Added ✅

    it's older-in-time previous message which gives us a nice straight line in
    the DAG.
    - **Depth discussion:** For Synapse, when persisting, we **reverse the list
      (to make it reverse-chronological)** so we can still get the correct
      `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)` so it sorts between A and B as
      we expect. Why?  `depth` is not re-calculated when historical messages are
      inserted into the DAG. This means we have to take care to insert in the
      right order. Events are sorted by `(topological_ordering,
      stream_ordering)` where `topological_ordering` is just `depth`. Normally,
      `stream_ordering` is an auto incrementing integer but for
      `backfilled=true` events, it decrements. Historical messages are inserted
      all at the same `depth`, and marked as backfilled so the `stream_ordering`
      decrements and each event is sorted behind the next. (from
      https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247#discussion_r588479201)

### Room DAG breakdown

#### Basic batch structure

Here is the starting point for how the historical batch concept looks like in
the DAG. We're going to build from this in the next sections.

>  - `A` is the oldest-in-time message

Reviewer 9: I'm confused about what exactly A is meant to represent here. "The oldest-in-time message" is the `m.room.create` event, but I don't think that's what you mean. I guess it's some event chosen by the AS and passed as `prev_event_id` to `batch_send`, but how does the AS choose it?

Reviewer 2: `A` is not the `m.room.create` event. It's just representing the oldest event in the graph for the DAG we're looking at.

I've added this note to the list which I think made it more clear:

>  - `A --> B` is any point in the DAG that we want to import between.

---

The AS just chooses where the event it wants to import between. For importing history before the room was created, you would probably choose some primoradial event like when `creator` member event where the rest of the base `auth_events` are in place.

For importing at a time where there is already room activity, you could use MSC3030 to find the closest event at that time to import next to.

 - `B` is the newest-in-time message
 - `batch0` is the first batch we try to import
 - Each batch of messages is older-in-time than the last (`batch1` is
   older-in-time than `batch0`, etc)

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    subgraph live
        B -------------> A
    end
    
    subgraph batch0

>         batch0-2(("2")) --> batch0-1((1)) --> batch0-0((0))

Reviewer 2: This graph is now removed https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r941463379

    end

    subgraph batch1
        batch1-2(("2")) --> batch1-1((1)) --> batch1-0((0))
    end
    
    subgraph batch2
        batch2-2(("2")) --> batch2-1((1)) --> batch2-0((0))
    end

    
    batch0-0 -------> A
    batch1-0 --> A
    batch2-0 --> A
    
    %% alignment links 
    batch0-0 --- batch1-2
    batch1-0 --- batch2-2
    %% make the links invisible 
    linkStyle 10 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;
    linkStyle 11 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;

> ```

Reviewer 9: I stared at this graph for quite a long time trying to understand it ("what does the edge between `batch0-0` and `A` represent?"), but eventually realised that actually it's not what happens at all and the next graph is more meaningful.... I'm afraid I don't think it's very helpful, sorry!

Reviewer 2: Removed and started with the "insertion" and "batch" section 👍

#### Adding "insertion" and "batch" events

Next we add "insertion" and "batch" events so it's more prescriptive on how each
historical batch should connect to each other and how the homeserver can
navigate the DAG.

 - With "insertion" events, we just add them to the start of each chronological
   batch (where the oldest message in the batch is). The next older-in-time
   batch can connect to that "insertion" point from the previous batch.
 - The initial base "insertion" event could be from the main DAG or we can
   create it ad-hoc in the first batch so the homeserver can start traversing up
   the batch from there after a "marker" event points to it.
 - We use `m.room.batch` events to indicate which `m.room.insertion` event it
   connects to by its `m.next_batch_id` field.

```mermaid

> flowchart BT

Reviewer 9: is there a way to annotate this graph that says "older events are at the top"? It makes sense, but it took @anoadragon453 and I quite a while to be sure that was the case.

---

 - A "marker" event simply points back to an "insertion" event.
 - The "marker" event solves the problem of, how does a federated homeserver
   know about the historical events which won't come down incremental sync? And
   the scenario where the federated HS already has all the history in the room,
   so it won't do a full sync of the room again.
 - Unlike the historical events sent via `/batch_send`, **the "marker" event is
   sent separately as a normal state event on the "live" timeline** so that
   comes down incremental sync and is available to all homeservers regardless of
   how much scrollback history they already have. And since it's state it never
   gets lost in a timeline gap and is immediately aparent to all servers that
   join.
 - Also instead of overwriting the same generic `state_key: ""` over and over,
   the expected behavior is send each "marker" event with a unique `state_key`.
   This way all of the "markers" are discoverable in the current state without
   us having to go through the chain of previous state to figure it all out.
   This also avoids potential state resolution conflicts where only one of the

>    "marker" events win and we would lose the other chain history.

Reviewer 2: I think that could work well.

One concern is that their could be thousands of insertion events in the room that the marker would have to keep track of and each consumer would need to re-process the one big marker event for any change.

Do we prefer the bloated state or bloated event?

How big can a single event scale? (event size limit ?)

>    "marker" events win and we would lose the other chain history.

Reviewer 11: Bloated state has the downsides of:

* homeservers needing to pull all of that state when they join the room
* slowing down the state resolution algorithm
* clients being handed all of that state when they initial sync

bloated event has the downside of:

* reprocessing a large event on each change (though surely this is just 1. deserialise json 2. diff against a data structure of already processed insertion events?)
* running up against the [event size limit](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#size-limits), which is 65336 bytes.
    * Though even with this relatively low limit, you could still fit ~1,440 insertion event references in there (65336 - 500 characters for the rest of the event / 45 event ID plus quotes and comma character length).
    * Another way to extend it would be still allowing marker events to have any `state_key`, but implementations would prefer to update an existing one before it hit the event size limit. If it's full, create a new one.

>    "marker" events win and we would lose the other chain history.

Reviewer 2: ## Bloated `m.room.marker` event (storing multiple `m.room.insertion` events)

> Another way to extend it would be still allowing marker events to have any `state_key`, but implementations would prefer to update an existing one before it hit the event size limit. If it's full, create a new one.

This sounds workable.

I don't like how it's complicated to know which `marker` event to update. You kinda just have to keep track of it in your app/bridge as there is no easy way to ask for the next marker event that isn't full. The `state_key` can just be sequential but it's still fuss to figure it out each time if you want to write something stateless.

---

One thing that might complicate this a bit more is wanting to keep track of the `m.room.insertion` `prev_events` on the `m.room.marker`, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r944084760. Maybe this would look like:

```json5
{
    "type": "m.room.marker",
    "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
    "content": {
        "m.insertion_event_references": [{
            "event_id": insertion_event.event_id
            "prev_event_ids": insertion_event.prev_events
        }, {
            "event_id": insertion_event2.event_id
            "prev_event_ids": insertion_event2.prev_events
        }],
    },
    "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639,
}
```

> You could just create synthetic events which look like normal DAG events but
  exist before the m.room.create event. Their signatures and prev-events would
  all be missing, but they would be blindly trusted based on the HS who is
  allowed to serve them (based on metadata in the m.room.create event). Thus
  you'd have a perimeter in the DAG beyond which events are no longer
  decentralised or signed, but are blindly trusted to let HSes insert ancient
  history provided by ASes.

However, this feels needlessly complicated if the DAG approach is sufficient.

## Security considerations

The "insertion" and "batch" events add a new way for an application service to
tie the batch reconciliation in knots(similar to the DAG knots that can happen)
which can potentially DoS message and backfill navigation on the server.

This also makes it much easier for an AS to maliciously spoof history.  This is
a bit unavoidable given the nature of the feature, and is also possible today
via SS API.

## Unstable prefix

Servers will indicate support for the new endpoint via a non-empty value for feature flag
`org.matrix.msc2716` in `unstable_features` in the response to `GET

> /_matrix/client/versions`.

Reviewer 11: I suggest we require `true` here, as other MSCs have done, which would help with the potentially easy footgun of a client author thinking `"org.matrix.msc2716": false` meaning the feature is disabled.

in the background, until however many decades of backfill were complete.
Finally, as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually
gradually added into the history of the room - slowly building up the complete
history of the conversations over time.

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * It is possible to override the timestamp with the `?ts` query parameter
   ([timestamp
   massaging](](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/application-service-api/#timestamp-massaging)))
   using the AS API but the event will still be appended to the tip of the DAG.
   It's not possible to change the DAG ordering with this.

## Proposal

## Expectation

Historical messages that we import should appear in the timeline just like they
would if they were sent back at that time.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

![Two historical batches in between some existing messages](./images/2716-message-scrollback-example.png)

> ### Any event

Reviewer 9: Also, I don't think that just saying "Any event" here is cutting it. More words: "A new `historical` property is defined which can be included in the `content` of any event to indicate it was retrospectively imported", or something. And the title should just be "`historical` property" or so.

> ### Any event

Reviewer 2: Moved the "Expectation" section above the "Proposal" 👍

---

Updated the words for the `historical` property with what you mentioned 👍

key | type | value | description | Required
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---

> `historical` | bool | `true` | Used on any event to hint that it was historically imported after the fact. This field should just be omitted if `false`. | no

Reviewer 9: * what are clients/servers supposed to do with this property?
* it will be removed by redaction - is that a problem?
* it will be difficult to trust that it is set correctly for events received over federation - is that a problem?
* if it is only intended as an indication from the local server to local clients, maybe an `unsigned` property would be more appropriate than embedding it permanently in the `content`?

Reviewer 2: > what are clients/servers supposed to do with this property?

Servers probably do nothing with this property.

It's just a hint/indication to clients that history didn't originally happen in the room. Perhaps a little "Historical" flag in the corner of these messages to show that they are maybe a little less trusted in terms of attribution.

> it will be removed by redaction - is that a problem?
>
> it will be difficult to trust that it is set correctly for events received over federation - is that a problem?

Totally untrusted and can be added to whatever event or not. In my eyes, it just means the event has less "credibility". Good stewards will use it to add the right semantics to their imported history. Others might not and that's fine for them. Homeservers can already add events in the room DAG without MSC2716 so it's just the same thing.

> if it is only intended as an indication from the local server to local clients, maybe an `unsigned` property would be more appropriate than embedding it permanently in the `content`?

The indication should be exposed to any federated servers that also consume the event.

Reviewer 9: Ok, makes sense. It would probably be good to mention some of this within the text here. The example of adding a UI indicator is particularly illuminating.

> ### `m.room.insertion`

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
## New event types

### `m.room.insertion`
```

Reviewer 2: Added the heading ✅

Events that mark points in time where you can insert historical messages.

**`m.room.insertion` event `content` field definitions:**

key | type | value | description | required
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
`next_batch_id` | string | randomly generated string | This is a random unique string that the next `m.room.batch` event should specify in order to connect to it. | yes

> A full example of the `m.room.insertion` event:

Reviewer 2: This pattern is just copied from https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/43d224accc81a8335305d22790f7eb1d61f282f8/proposals/3672-ephemeral-location-streaming.md#proposal as suggested by @anoadragon453 in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r943477809.

Language suggestion welcome

> A full example of the `m.room.insertion` event:

Reviewer 9: I'd just omit `full` to be honest.

    "historical": true
  },
  "event_id": "$batchabcd:example.org",
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  // Doesn't affect much but good to use the same time as the closest event
  "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639
}
```

### `m.room.marker`

State event used to hint to homeservers that there is new
history back in time that you should go fetch next time someone scrolls back
around the specified insertion event. Also used on clients to cache bust the
timeline.

**`m.room.marker` event `content` field definitions:**

key | type | value | description | required
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
`insertion_event_reference` | string | Another `event_id` | Used to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by its `event_id`. | yes

A full example of the `m.room.marker` event:
```json5
{
    "type": "m.room.marker",
    "state_key": "<some-unique-state-key>",
    "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
    "content": {
        "insertion_event_reference": "$insertionabcd:example.org"
    },
    "event_id": "$markerabcd:example.org",
    "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639,
}
```

### New historical batch send endpoint

> Add a new endpoint, `POST
> /_matrix/client/v1/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<eventID>&batch_id=<batchID>`,

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Add a new endpoint, `POST
/_matrix/client/v1/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<eventID>&batch_id=<batchID>`,
```

after that. For more information on this Synapse constraint, see the ["Depth
discussion"](#depth-discussion) below. **tldr; Insert from your most recent
batch of history -> oldest history.**

One aspect that isn't solved yet is how to handle relations/annotations (such as
reactions, replies, and threaded conversations) that reference each other within
the same `events` batch because the events don't have `event_ids` to reference
before being persisted. A solution for this can be proposed in another MSC.

#### What does the batch send endpoint do behind the scenes?

This section explains the homeserver magic that happens when someone uses the
`/batch_send` endpoint. If you're just trying to understand how the `m.room.insertion`,
`m.room.batch`, `m.room.marker` events work, you might want to just skip down to the room DAG
breakdown which incrementally explains how everything fits together.

 1. A `m.room.insertion` event for the batch is added to the start of the batch.
    This will be the starting point of the next batch and holds the `next_batch_id`
    that we return in the batch send response. The application service passes

>     this as `?batch_id`

Reviewer 9: how does the AS know the batch id before the `m.room.insertion` event is generated?

Reviewer 2: Clarified this by adding:

> The application service passes this as `?batch_id` next time to continue the chain of historical messages.

 1. A `m.room.batch` event is added to the end of the batch. This is the event that

>     connects to an insertion event by `?batch_id`.

Reviewer 9: "connects"?

Reviewer 2: I've clarified this by adding:

>  1. A `m.room.batch` event is added to the end of the batch. This is the event
    that connects to an `m.room.insertion` event by specifying a `batch_id` that
    matches the `next_batch_id` on the `m.room.insertion` event.

 1. If `?batch_id` is not specified (usually only for the first batch), create a
    base `m.room.insertion` event as a jumping off point from `?prev_event_id` which can

>     be added to the end of the `events` list in the response.

Reviewer 2: > so to be clear: for the first batch, we'll generate two `m.room.insertion` events? 

In most cases yes. What's "commonly" referred to as the "base `m.room.insertion` event" and `m.room.insertion` event for the batch.

The automatic "base `m.room.insertion` event" is only created when you don't provide a the `?batch_id`:

>  3. If `?batch_id` is not specified (usually only for the first batch), create a
    base `m.room.insertion` event as a jumping off point from `?prev_event_id` which can
    be added to the end of the `events` list in the response.

But you can provide `?batch_id` in your first batch if the insertion event lives in the "live" DAG in which case, no marker event is necessary to discover the history either. You have to really be thinking ahead to send an insertion event where you need it though 😁

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    A --- annotation1>"Note: older events are at the top"]
    subgraph live timeline
        B -----> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\] ---------------> A
    end
    
    subgraph batch0
        batch0-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch0-2(("2")) --> batch0-1((1)) --> batch0-0((0)) --> batch0-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    subgraph batch1
        batch1-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch1-2(("2")) --> batch1-1((1)) --> batch1-0((0)) --> batch1-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    subgraph batch2
        batch2-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch2-2(("2")) --> batch2-1((1)) --> batch2-0((0)) --> batch2-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    batch0-batch -.-> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\]
    batch1-batch -.-> batch0-insertion
    batch2-batch -.-> batch1-insertion
    %% alignment links 
    batch2-insertion --- alignment1
    %% make the alignment links/nodes invisible
    style alignment1 visibility: hidden,color:transparent;
    linkStyle 18 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;
    %% make the annotation links invisible
    linkStyle 0 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;
```

---

> (it seems like they are representing rather different things - does it really make sense to use the same event type?)

They seem more like the same thing to me. Just a place you can insert next to and so homeservers know they need to backfill from these spots to find the connected batch.

   `m.room.insertion` event that the batch connects to.

Here is how the historical batch concept looks like in the DAG:

 - `A <--- B` is any point in the DAG that we want to import between.
 - `A` is the oldest-in-time message
 - `B` is the newest-in-time message
 - `batch0` is the first batch we try to import
 - Each batch of messages is older-in-time than the last (`batch1` is
   older-in-time than `batch0`, etc)

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    A --- annotation1>"Note: older events are at the top"]
    subgraph live [live timeline]
        B --------------------> A
    end
    
    subgraph batch0
        batch0-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch0-2(("2")) --> batch0-1((1)) --> batch0-0((0)) --> batch0-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    subgraph batch1
        batch1-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch1-2(("2")) --> batch1-1((1)) --> batch1-0((0)) --> batch1-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    subgraph batch2
        batch2-batch[[`m.room.batch`]] --> batch2-2(("2")) --> batch2-1((1)) --> batch2-0((0)) --> batch2-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    
    batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\] ---------------> A

>     batch0-batch -.-> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\]

Reviewer 2: Yes, the base insertion event has `A` as a `prev_event` (where you're importing next to)

>     batch0-batch -.-> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\]

Reviewer 9: arg. Sorry, I asked the wrong question (or rather, asked it about the wrong event). I was trying to ask about the `insertion` event at the start of `batch0` (which I think is called `batch0-insertion`?). Does *that* have any `prev_event`s?

>     batch0-batch -.-> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\]

Reviewer 2: The `insertion` event at the start of `batch0` has `prev_events: []` (empty list) and floats in the DAG.

    %% make the annotation links invisible
    linkStyle 0 stroke-width:2px,fill:none,stroke:none;
```

#### Adding marker events

Finally, we add `m.room.marker` state events into the mix so that federated remote
servers also know where in the DAG they should look for historical messages.

To lay out the different types of servers consuming these historical messages
(more context on why we need `m.room.marker` events):

 1. Local server
    - This pretty much works out of the box. It's possible to just add the
      historical events to the database and they're available. The new endpoint
      is just a mechanism to insert the events.
 1. Federated remote server that already has *all* scrollback history and then
    new history is inserted
    - The big problem is how does a HS know it needs to go fetch more history if
      they already fetched all of the history in the room? We're solving this
      with `m.room.marker` state events which are sent on the "live" timeline and point
      back to the `m.room.insertion` event where we inserted history next to. The HS
      can then go and backfill the `m.room.insertion` event and continue navigating the

>       historical batches from there.

Reviewer 2: > (ie, what happens if I join Matrix HQ and send thousands of "marker" events saying that I have timeline you should backfill)?

You can send as many marker events as you want which will be received but they won't be processed and have special meaning unless you have the right power-level (or the room creator in existing room versions).

    - Those homeservers won't have historical messages available because they're
      unable to navigate the `m.room.marker`/`m.room.insertion`/`m.room.batch` events. But the
      historical messages would be available once the HS implements MSC2716 and
      processes the `m.room.marker` events that point to the history.

---

 - A `m.room.marker` event simply points back to an `m.room.insertion` event.
 - The `m.room.marker` event solves the problem of, how does a federated homeserver
   know about the historical events which won't come down incremental sync? And
   the scenario where the federated HS already has all the history in the room,
   so it won't do a full sync of the room again.
 - Unlike the historical events sent via `/batch_send`, **the `m.room.marker` event is
   sent separately as a normal state event on the "live" timeline** so that
   comes down incremental sync and is available to all homeservers regardless of
   how much scrollback history they already have. And since it's state it never
   gets lost in a timeline gap and is immediately apparent to all servers that
   join.
 - Also instead of overwriting the same generic `state_key: ""` over and over,

>    the expected behavior is send each `m.room.marker` event with a unique `state_key`.

Reviewer 2: There is a discussion going on for this: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r941473833

messages to the next insertion event, then repeat the process.

**`m.room.batch` event `content` field definitions:**

key | type | value | description | required
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
`m.batch_id` | string | A batch ID from an insertion event | Used to indicate which `m.room.insertion` event it connects to by its `m.next_batch_id` field. | yes

A full example of the `m.room.batch` event:
```json5
{
  "type": "m.room.batch",
  "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
  "content": {
    "m.batch_id": "w25ljc1kb4",
    "m.historical": true
  },
  "event_id": "$batchabcd:example.org",
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  // Doesn't affect much but good to use the same time as the closest event
  "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639
}
```

### `m.room.marker`

State event used to hint to homeservers that there is new
history back in time that you should go fetch next time someone scrolls back
around the specified insertion event. Also used on clients to cache bust the
timeline.

**`m.room.marker` event `content` field definitions:**

key | type | value | description | required
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---

> `m.marker.insertion` | string | Another `event_id` | Used to point at an `m.room.insertion` event by its `event_id`. | yes

Reviewer 2: *Spawning from https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/pull/2299#discussion_r850124854*

We might want to add `m.insertion_prev_events` as well to `m.room.marker` event so that we can specifically tell whether the historical messages actually affected the locally cached client timeline or not.  The problem is we can't see the `prev_events` of the base `m.room.insertion` event that the `m.room.marker` was pointing to because `prev_events` aren't available in the client API's.

```json5
{
    "type": "m.room.marker",
    "sender": "@appservice:example.org",
    "content": {
        "m.insertion_id": insertion_event.event_id,
        "m.insertion_prev_events": insertion_event.prev_events
    },
    "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
    "origin_server_ts": 1626914158639,
}
```

> # MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms

Reviewer 2: > Also: have you tested any of this stuff over federation? I'm generally worried about how the event auth is going to work.
>
> *-- @richvdh, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#pullrequestreview-1082496763*

Yes, there is a suite of [Complement tests](https://github.com/matrix-org/complement/blob/53024b2c6bce2bb6741e13e4d373e49f095315cd/tests/msc2716_test.go#L590-L1029) that test this over federation.

Events are authed based on what their `auth_events` are set as. Their `prev_events` don't matter. This works even without any MSC2716 changes.

Reviewer 9: Ok, great! I'll have more questions, but this gives me confidence for now :)

in the background, until however many decades of backfill were complete.
Finally, as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually
gradually added into the history of the room - slowly building up the complete
history of the conversations over time.

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * It is possible to override the timestamp with the `?ts` query parameter
   ([timestamp
   massaging](](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/application-service-api/#timestamp-massaging)))
   using the AS API but the event will still be appended to the tip of the DAG.
   It's not possible to change the DAG ordering with this.

## Expectation

Historical messages that we import should appear in the timeline just like they
would if they were sent back at that time. In the example below, Maria's
messages 1-6 were sent originally in the room and the "Historical" messages in
the middle were imported after the fact.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

> ![Two historical batches in between some existing messages](./images/2716-message-scrollback-example.png)

Reviewer 2: > For this sort of thing, we need to *start* with a high-level explanation of how it works. Once the reader has an understanding of the principles, *then* we can explain the nitty-gritty details.
> 
> The "Expectation" is a great start here: next let's talk in general terms about how it would be generated.
> 
> So, how does all this start? I think the AS calls the `/batch_send` API (with a `prev_event_id` and no `batch_id`)? How does it know what to set `prev_event_id` to? And then it calls it again to do the `batch=1` events? When would it need to set batch_id?
> 
> And what does maria and madlittlemods' conversation look like from the PoV of the DAG?
>
> *-- @richvdh, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#pullrequestreview-1082496763*

Updated the "Expectation" with a breakdown of how this is accomplished and how the DAG looks ✅

To be clear, this is already my goal as indicated by my intentions here "skip down to the room DAG breakdown which incrementally explains how everything fits together." but I am probably very blind to exact right way to do this. Feel free to keep suggesting in this area 👍

Reviewer 9: This new introduction is *super* helpful for setting context. The correlation between the screenshot and the worked example just below makes this really clear. Thank you! :heart:

 - The "marker" event solves the problem of, how does a federated homeserver
   know about the historical events which won't come down incremental sync? And
   the scenario where the federated HS already has all the history in the room,
   so it won't do a full sync of the room again.
 - Unlike the historical events sent via `/batch_send`, **the "marker" event is
   sent separately as a normal event on the "live" timeline** so that comes down
   incremental sync and is available to all homeservers regardless of how much
   scrollback history they already have.
    - Note: If a server joins after a "marker" event is sent, it could be lost
      in the middle of the timeline and they could jump back in time past the
      "marker" and never pick it up. But `backfill/` response should have
      historical messages included. It gets a bit hairy if the server has the
      room backfilled, the user leaves, a "marker" event is sent, more messages
      put it back in the timeline, the user joins back, jumps back in the
      timeline and misses the "marker" and expects to see the historical
      messages. They will be missing the historical messages until they can

>       backfill the gap where they left.

Reviewer 2: Related to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r671038000

Reviewer 2: As discussed in the [linked thread](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#discussion_r671038000) above and [sync](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KCEmpnGr4J-I8EeaVQ8QJZKBDu53ViI7V62y5BzfXr0/edit#bookmark=id.67nio1ka8znc) [discussions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JJDuPfcPNX75fprdTWlxlaKjWOdbdJylbpZ03hzo638/edit#bookmark=id.sm92fqyq7vpp) with @ara4n and @erikjohnston, we can solve this by making marker events as state. This way they are always discoverable to federated homeservers whenever joining the room since the homeserver will pick up the current state in the room.

Also instead of overwriting the same generic `state_key: ""` over and over, the expected behavior is send each marker event with a unique `state_key`. This way all of the markers are discoverable in the current state without us having to go through the chain of previous state to figure it all out. This also avoids potential state resolution conflicts where only one of the marker events win and we would lose the other history.

Reviewer 2: Addressed by:

 - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/12718
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/complement/pull/371

Reviewer 2: Added details for marker events as state to the MSC ✅ https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716/commits/2544a3f45d152fffc305ce218290af8550a20719

    end

    subgraph batch1
        batch1-batch[["batch"]] --> batch1-2(("2")) --> batch1-1((1)) --> batch1-0((0)) --> batch1-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    subgraph batch2
        batch2-batch[["batch"]] --> batch2-2(("2")) --> batch2-1((1)) --> batch2-0((0)) --> batch2-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    batch0-insertion --> fakePrevEvent0{{fake_prev_event}}
    batch1-insertion --> fakePrevEvent1{{fake_prev_event}}
    batch2-insertion --> fakePrevEvent2{{fake_prev_event}}

    
    marker1 -.-> batch0-insertionBase
    batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\] ---------------> A
    batch0-batch -.-> batch0-insertionBase[/insertion\]
    batch1-batch -.-> batch0-insertion
    batch2-batch -.-> batch1-insertion
```

</details>

#### Add in the historical state

In order to show the display name and avatar for the historical messages,
the state provided by `state_events_at_start` needs to resolve when one of
the historical messages is fetched.

It's probably most semantic to have the state float outside of the normal DAG
in a chain by referencing a fake `prev_event`. Then the insertion event

> reference the last piece in the floating state chain.

Reviewer 2: In Synapse, we've moved to having them float by having an empty set of `prev_events`

(i.e. without parent prev_events or signatures).  To quote the original
[bug](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/698#issuecomment-259478116):

> You could just create synthetic events which look like normal DAG events but
  exist before the m.room.create event. Their signatures and prev-events would
  all be missing, but they would be blindly trusted based on the HS who is
  allowed to serve them (based on metadata in the m.room.create event). Thus
  you'd have a perimeter in the DAG beyond which events are no longer
  decentralised or signed, but are blindly trusted to let HSes insert ancient
  history provided by ASes.

However, this feels needlessly complicated if the DAG approach is sufficient.

## Security considerations

The "insertion" and "batch" events add a new way for an application service to
tie the batch reconciliation in knots(similar to the DAG knots that can happen)
which can potentially DoS message and backfill navigation on the server.

This also makes it much easier for an AS to maliciously spoof history.  This is
a bit unavoidable given the nature of the feature, and is also possible today
via SS API.

> 

Reviewer 4: AFAICT, if this is used to import history from a Matrix room, this should only be used for rooms that have `m.room.history_visibility` set to `world_readable` or `shared`, as this effectively makes the entire imported room history visible to everyone in the room.  Similar for importing history from other systems that can restrict history visibility.

Reviewer 2: > AFAICT, if this is used to import history from a Matrix room, this should only be used for rooms that have `m.room.history_visibility` set to `world_readable` or `shared`, as this effectively makes the entire imported room history visible to everyone in the room.

My guess is that the imported events would have the same history visibility as the event they branch off from since they inherit the state of the event they branch from.

Is history visibility normally only enforced by E2EE where you just don't have the keys from before? Am I missing something?

Reviewer 4: > My guess is that the imported events would have the same history visibility as the event they branch off from since they inherit the state of the event they branch from.

Yes, that would be my understanding as well.

> Is history visibility normally only enforced by E2EE where you just don't have the keys from before? Am I missing something?

[Room history](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/#room-history-visibility) is enforced by the server, so it works even if non-E2EE rooms.  If you join a room that has the history setting to `invited` or `joined`, then the server won't let you see any of the events sent before you were invited/joined.

This isn't necessarily a problem for this MSC, as it will still work fine for rooms where the imported history is supposed to be either publicly available, or available to all room members.  But it is worth noting, that there may be issues if you want to use this in situations where the imported history should only be visible to certain people.

Reviewer 2: The only thing left on this thread appears to be:

> But it is worth noting, that there may be issues if you want to use this in situations where the imported history should only be visible to certain people.

Which use cases should we make sure this accommodates?

By default, the historical messages will inherit the history visibility from event it was imported next to.

I think you could also specify a `m.room.history_visibility` event in `state_events_at_start` to adjust it to your liking as well.

@uhoreg Anything you want to make sure is noted in the MSC about this?

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * It is possible to override the timestamp with the `?ts` query parameter
   ([timestamp
   massaging](](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/application-service-api/#timestamp-massaging)))
   using the AS API but the event will still be appended to the tip of the DAG.
   It's not possible to change the DAG ordering with this.

## Expectation

Historical messages that we import should appear in the timeline just like they
would if they were sent back at that time. In the example below, Maria's
messages 1-6 were sent originally in the room and the "Historical" messages in
the middle were imported after the fact.

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

![Two historical batches in between some existing messages](./images/2716-message-scrollback-example.png)

To accomplish what's shown in the image, this is the basic flow:

 1. `maria` sends messages 1-6. These represent messages in the normal "live" timeline before any history is imported.

>  1. Create hitsorical batch 0 via `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<message3-eventID>` with the "Historical [xyz]" message `events` from Eric and the necessary `state_events_at_start` to auth them.

Reviewer 9: hitsorical

    - This will return a response that contains the `next_batch_id` that we will use for the next batch.
    - This also returns `base_insertion_event_id` which we will use the for the `m.room.marker` even later.
 1. Create hitsorical batch 1 via `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<message3-eventID>&batch_id=<batchID-that-we-got-from-the-previous-batch>` with the "Historical [foo|bar|baz]" message `events` from Eric and the necessary `state_events_at_start` to auth them.

>  1. Send a `m.room.marker` event so the history is discoverable across all federated homeservers: `PUT /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/send/m.room.marker/{txnId}` with `insertion_event_reference` set as the `base_insertion_event_id` from before.

Reviewer 2: > For example, it seems to start from an assumption that I know how an `m.room.insertion` event gets into the timeline. With a bunch of hunting I find (I think) this information in "What does the batch send endpoint do behind the scenes?" but that seems to be almost an afterthought.
>
> *-- @richvdh, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2716#pullrequestreview-1082496763*

Do you want these details somewhere around here? Any suggestions?

Reviewer 9: It might not hurt to mention, within the bullet list in step 2, that `/batch_send` inserts `m.room.insertion` events as necessary with some handwaving about the purpose of doing so.

    // historical message1 event ID
    // historical message2 event ID
  ],
  "next_batch_id": "random-unique-string",
  "insertion_event_id": "$X9RSsCPKu5gTVIJCoDe6HeCmsrp6kD31zXjMRfBCADE",
  "batch_event_id": "$kHspK8a5kQN2xkTJMDWL-BbmeYVYAloQAA9QSLOsOZ4",
  // When `?batch_id` isn't provided, the homeserver automatically creates an
  // insertion event as a starting place to hang the history off of. This automatic
  // insertion event ID is returned in this field.
  //
  // When `?batch_id` is provided, this field is not present because we can hang
  // the history off the insertion event specified and associated by the batch ID.
  "base_insertion_event_id": "$pmmaTamxhcyLrrOKSrJf3c1zNmfvsE5SGpFpgE_UvN0"
}
```

`state_events_at_start` is unioned with the state at the `prev_event_id` and is
used to define the historical state events needed to auth the `events` like
invite and join events. These events can float outside of the normal DAG. In
Synapse, these are called `outlier`s and won't be visible in the chat history
which also allows us to insert multiple batches without having a bunch of `@mxid
joined the room` noise between each batch. **The state will not be resolved into

> the current state of the room.**

Reviewer 12: Current behavior of synapse is undesirable because it fails backfilled joins for members who have already joined the room.

Does the spec need to clarify that the client implementation must validate the current state of the room before sending a batch event, or should the spec dictate server implementations to ignore batched member state events that are already fulfilled in the current state of the room?

Reviewer 2: What fails about the member already being joined to the room? What error are you seeing? I would assume this should work because a `m.room.member` transition from `join` -> `join` is allowed, https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/client-server-api/#mroommember

For clarity, it would be good to see your exact request that is failing.

---

Back to your topic of how to resolve things; we would want the conflict resolution to be general and the same for all event types. Doing something different for `m.room.member` would be a recipe for complexity foot-guns.

Reviewer 5: In most cases, bridges have to include invite events, and join -> invite is not allowed.

Ignoring such state events feels like it'd be the easiest to implement on the server, but it doesn't necessarily need to be built into `state_events_at_start` at all, it could be a new `members` field that the server uses to add invite and join events as necessary, or it could even just detect senders of the events in the batch. From the bridge point of view, all of those options are easy to implement.

Beeper (hungryserv) does the last option: it gets the list of users from the event senders, filters away any users who are already in the room and then creates member events for the missing users. (we also don't have any use cases for state events, so the server forbids using `state_events_at_start` entirely)

 - When redacting `m.room.marker` events, keep the `insertion_event_reference` content field around
 - When redacting `m.room.power_levels` events, keep the `historical` content field around

#### Backwards compatibility with existing room versions

However, this MSC is mostly backwards compatible and can be used with the
current room version with the fact that redactions aren't supported for
`m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, `m.room.marker` events. We can protect
people from this limitation by throwing an error when they try to use [`PUT
/_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/redact/{eventId}/{txnId}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#put_matrixclientv3roomsroomidredacteventidtxnid)
to redact one of those events. We would have to accept the redaction if
it came over federation to avoid split-brained rooms.

Because we also can't use the `historical` power level for controlling who can
send these events in the existing room version, we always persist but instead
only process and give meaning to the `m.room.insertion`, `m.room.batch`, and
`m.room.marker` events when the room `creator` sends them. This caveat/rule only

> applies to existing room versions.

Reviewer 10: Is this using soft rejection on the server-side to determine valid-ness of events? Currently it reads a bit like an event auth change, which can't happen with respect to existing room versions.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't reject or soft-fail any events in existing room versions.

If the homeserver sees one of those event types from the room creator, the homeserver will process as necessary to make the imported history display when paginating over that area of the room.

Otherwise, it just appears as any other event in the room, nothing happens, and the imported history isn't visible. If the homeserver ever adds MSC2716 support, that history suddenly is unlocked for that server once they re-process the events in the room (probably as a background job).

lazy-insert some more messages (as per
https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/698). For this MSC to be
extra useful, we might want to flesh that out. Another related problem with
the existing AS query APIs is that they don't include who is querying,
so they're hard to use in bridges that require logging in. If a similar query
API is added here, it should include the ID of the user who's asking for
history.

## Alternatives

We could insist that we use the SS API to import history history in this manner
rather than extending the AS API.  However, it seems unnecessarily burdensome to
make bridge authors understand the SS API, especially when we already have so
many AS API bridges.  Hence these minor extensions to the existing AS API.

Another way of doing this is using the existing single send state and event API
endpoints. We could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}`
with `?historical=true` which would create the floating outlier state events.
Then we could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`,
with `?prev_event_id` pointing at that floating state to auth the event and where we
want to insert the event.

> Another way of doing this might be to store the different eras of the room as

Reviewer 13: Has there been any discussion around being able to import history *from the client*?

Assume someone was previously active on IRC, and creates a Matrix account, then joins an IRC channel via `matrix-appservice-irc`.
That person might already have had some room history, or DMs, and it would be nice if there was a way to "import" these old logs from the IRC client into some room state, and then see it consistently in all their Matrix clients.

This would need to be stored somewhere server-side, so it's available across all devices, but it might not necessarily be shared to other room members (even though two parties might decide to migrate their conversation history that has happened on IRC to a Matrix DM room)

Reviewer 2: @flokli The new `/batch_send` endpoint here is in the client API -> `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event_id=<message3-eventID>` but is currently restricted to application service tokens currently.

If there are good user cases for it, we could easily remove this restriction to allow any room admin (person with proper power levels) to do it.

Reviewer 13: Thanks for the clarification!

Reviewer 14: I agree, I would be very much interested in this too, being able to import old chats to an appservice would be quite relevant.
